Great, so thanks for coming to this talk. I'm Gabor, I work at RStudio, I'm a software
engineer and I will show you today an R package that is called actually not packageman, there
is a name change here, but it's called just package or pkg, which is, you know, interesting
if you talk about the package package, so I would just probably call it pkg, that maybe
sounds better. So pkg is a package for package installation and I will, you know, tell you
briefly why we are writing this package and what are the goals that we want to have, we
achieve and what features the package has, you know, to achieve these goals and a little
bit about, you know, project-based workflows, which is kind of the long-term goals that
we want to have and about ongoing work. Okay, so goal number one, so there is already a
way to install packages in R, right? In base R there is a function you can use, you know,
to install packages and it works actually pretty well. It installs packages from CRAN
or any kind of CRAN-like repository, right? And then there are other tools, some of them
developed at RStudio, like the devtools package and the remotes package to install packages
from other sources. So there are a lot of tools already, you know, that exist basically
to install packages, so why are we writing, you know, another one? So basically, to summarize
it very, you know, simply, we want to have cheap and reliable package installation and
I will tell you, you know, what I mean by cheap and reliable. So cheap is easy, so it
should be, you know, minimal effort to install the right packages for your projects in the
light library using some simple, you know, short function call. And it should also be
fast, you know, this is actually very important because if it's fast, then it is okay to do
it, you know, kind of frequently. And that in turn is important because the kind of workflows
we are shifting towards to require, you know, more frequent package installation. But if
you know this is, you know, hard and slow, then people would just not do it. So we would
just not, you know, get those workflows. So reliable means these are not very surprising
things, right? So it should leave the packages in a working state. That doesn't actually
always happen, you know, with the existing tools, so we are trying to make, you know,
more, make an effort that this happens and your package is installed in a working state
and it's not in a broken state because of some error happened, you know, halfway through
the installation. We want to leave the project in a working state so, you know, all the dependencies
are properly satisfied in your library for your project. We want to put all the dependencies
of a project in a single library because this will help us with the workflows we want to,
you know, tend towards to. Related to this, if you have multiple projects, you know, the
dependencies and the packages, you know, that you need for these multiple projects, they
should not interfere. You know, if you have a project that needs a certain version of
dplyr, you know, and then you have another project that needs a different version, you
know, of dplyr because you just started that project, you know, one year later and then
the dplyr syntax maybe changed a little bit or the semantics changed a little bit, then,
you know, you should be able to work with these, you know, two projects without having
any kind of interference. And, of course, so package pkg is an R package itself and
so it has its own dependencies and those should not interfere, obviously, with your regular,
you know, project dependencies either. So how to make it fast? We did a lot of effort,
you know, to make pkg fast. The first one is to make all the HTTP requests, you know,
concurrent. So if you are installing CRAN packages only, then this is kind of, you know,
impossible to achieve. If you have packages from other sources like packages from GitHub
or packages from your own repositories, you know, then it's a little bit harder. You know,
if typically if you're installing a package from GitHub, you have to make several requests
to the GitHub API and then, you know, that package that you're installing from GitHub
might depend on other packages on GitHub and that means you need to make even more requests
to the GitHub API. So if you don't do this concurrently, it will be just very slow. It's
very simple. The package builds and the installations are also concurrent. You know, some of the
base tools, base R tools can do this too, but obviously we wanted to have it too. Pkg
is quite lazy, so by default it doesn't actually download or do anything if it doesn't, you
know, have to. So if you don't, you know, explicitly tell it to, that you want to update,
you know, to some, to the newest version or a newer version, then it will not update,
you know. If the current version is good enough for your project, then it will not
do anything. It will not update just for the sake of updating. And probably the most important,
you know, two features for speed is the cache, the cached metadata and the cached package
files. So with the current tools, probably all of them, you know, package, two tools
managing packages and package installation, you know, if you want to, you know, if you
install a package, you know, you need to make a download. You need to download the package
file. If you do the same thing five minutes later, you will probably download it again,
which is not how, you know, an ideal package manager should work. There should be some
cache and that makes it really, really fast. So there are some safety features because
we want, you know, a reliable way to install packages. The first one seems like a joke,
right? So it's, but it's actually not. So some of the tools actually, they don't fail
if some error happens and it will just, you know, they will just leave you in a broken
state with a broken installation. So it's nice to fail if there's an error, you know.
So if you can't install something, you should fail. I mentioned this already, all the dependencies
go in the same library. What package it does is it solves the dependency structure of your
installation and if there's a problem with that, it reports it up front. So it doesn't
actually start, you know, installing packages until it knows that, okay, this will be okay.
You will get a consistent state of the library and it reports all the conflicts up front
and then you can, you know, see what you can do about those conflicts. All the dependencies
of PKG itself, they're in a private library so they don't, you know, interfere with your
other normal, you know, packages, package dependencies. And this works, you know, this
happens seamlessly so you don't really need to, you know, worry about this. PKG just puts
them there and just uses them. It also uses a subprocess to perform the installation because
in R and the package system, you know, it's often a problem if you want to install a package
that is loaded in a session. Okay, so usually when you, you know, your package installation
fails then, you know, the older R users will tell you to, you know, quit all the R sessions
that you have and then start with an empty session to install because of this problem.
So to work around this, you know, PKG uses a subprocess so its own dependencies are only
loaded in the subprocess and they're loaded from the private library so you don't have
this interference there. Yeah, and you also try to, you know, detect if you have a package
loaded from the library that you want to overwrite, you want to install through just to, you know,
detect these possible problems. Okay, so it has some convenience features. It supports
CRAN, BIOC packages, out of the box, GitHub packages really easily. So there is something
called the remotes field in the description file. If you haven't seen this before, that
allows you to depend on non-standard packages, you know, in your own package and make the
installation just work, you know, seamlessly. So you can put, there's an example at the
bottom, so you can put this entry in your description file and the first, actually both
lines, both of those dependencies refer to GitHub. So it's just, you know, username slash
repository and then the second example, it has an at dev, that's a branch on GitHub.
It just means that, you know, for this project or for this package, you need to install,
you know, the glue package from GitHub and you actually want to have the dev branch so
we support all this. This is not really new, you know, the dev tools package has supported
this for a while and the remotes package as well. It supports local package files
and package trees so you can install obviously from, you know, files on your own disk. It's
a nice convenience feature that it will show you the download sizes, you know, before you
actually do the installation and also in the progress bar, so if you have like a big installation
and your Internet is, you know, not the best, you will see, you know, how long it will take
to install all that. So I'll just show you a little demo, you know, how this works in
practice. So this is just a very basic R session that I have here. Is this big enough or should
I make it bigger? This should be good, right? Okay, so the main function that you use is
called package install and then, you know, obviously CRAN and bioconductor packages will
just work seamlessly. I will give a separate library here not to, you know, mess up my
own libraries, so it will just install there. So if you do this, you know, then PKG will
solve your installation, it will find all your dependencies and this looks like this
is a CRAN package, you know, CRAN is in a consistent state almost always, so the installation
is possible and it will also tell you that it will install, you know, these 18 packages
and it will download them from CRAN. I just cleared my cache, so that's why they are not
cached. So if I want to continue, I just say yes and then it will, Internet is really fast
here, so it will download them very, very quickly and then, you know, install them very
quickly. So this is not surprising, right? If you, obviously, if I run this again, you
know, then it will take a look at the installed packages, you know, and then see that actually,
it sees that actually there's nothing to do, so it does nothing, right? Now, the more
interesting case is that, you know, when you install, when you download these package files,
it also adds the package files to the cache. So if I were to completely remove this library
like this and I do this again, and in a more realistic situation, you know, what happens
is that you just give your project to somebody else, to your colleague, and your project,
you know, dependencies are described in your description file and your colleague will,
you know, install all the dependencies for your project. Now, if your colleague has all
these packages in the cache, like we do now, so it tells you that all 18 packages are cached.
So if these are commonly used packages, you know, you don't actually need to download
them, you know, it will, even if the Internet was slow, though it is not slow here, you
know, this is really fast because everything is coming from the cache. Okay. So GitHub
packages work really easily. Bioconductor packages as well. You don't need to do anything,
you know, special for a bioconductor package. This is a bioconductor package. It's just
automatically included. The only glitch with the bioconductor package is that we don't
know their sizes up front, so it will tell you, you know, that it will download 16 packages
from CRAN, roughly 20 megabytes, and, you know, 12 more packages that, but the size
of those is not known. And it will obviously add all these to the cache, so if you do it
again, you know, next time, you don't need to download them. So for packages from GitHub,
let's say, I can install PKG itself, maybe. That's a good example. And it will also tell
you that, you know, there is one package with unknown size and that's the rlib slash PKG
package because that's coming from GitHub and we don't know the sizes of those packages,
actually. And there are a bunch of packages in this library that are already there, so
you don't actually even need to install them. Yeah, it needs to build PKG because that's
not a built package. It's just a repository. So that's how it works, the simple parts at
least. Let me go back to the, yeah, so I showed you GitHub packages. And the other thing I
want to show you, what happens if you have a conflict. So I artificially created a conflict
here in this branch, the conflict branch. So in this branch, the PKG package depends
on a package version of some other package that is not available. So if you try to do
that, you know, this, you know, PKG tries to solve the dependency tree, so this will
come up immediately. It will tell you that it can't, you know, it can't install package
cache. And then you can look, you know, into your dependencies and see why that is the
case. Another one, another conflict that I artificially created is the conflict branch
of this package. And if I try to install this together with the CLI package, but not
the master branch, but say this branch, then what happens is the PKG package, this branch
of the PKG cache package, you know, depends on one version of CLI. So that's what you
can see there, cannot install dependency or leave CLI master. It wants the master, you
know, branch. And, but I also, you know, upfront said that I wanted to install this other branch.
And then, you know, our libraries are just such that you can't install two different
versions of the same package in the same library. So this is a conflict. This is not, you know,
anything that we can do. So PKG tells you upfront. Okay. So the main goal actually,
or the, you know, longer term goal and the reason why we want to make, you know, package
installation cheap and reliable is that we want to have safe and convenient workflows.
And these would be workflows that are centered on projects. So I will show you one workflow
that is already possible with the PKG package. There is some more work to be done to make
this super convenient, but this, if you organize, you know, your project or your package this
way, this already works. And it's relatively actually easy to do it. So you would have
a new project or package, you know, some files and directories that you can, sorry, that
you can see here. So the R directory is the usual, you know, place for your code. If this
is a package, you know, this structure is not really surprising. The package usually
has an R directory, has a description file, right? If it's a project, you don't necessarily
need to create this, but you can, obviously. And if you do, then PKG will help you, you
know, with the installation and the separation of your project libraries and so on. So the
description file will be used to, you know, describe the dependencies. We need to create
an R profile, .rprofile file here, which will set up, you know, to your project library.
And it's very simple. So there's a short example in the bottom. Basically, it will source the
main R profile, you know, it will create your directory for your library, which will
be the R-packages directory, and then it makes sure that it is added to your library path.
So that's the bottom line. And then in your description file, you can, sorry, you can
describe your dependencies the usual way. You know, either you can just use a depends
or imports field if this is a package, but potentially with versions. And you can also
use the remotes field if you want, you know, a package from a non, you know, canonical
source. And then to do the installation, you know, after you have this setup, you can
use, you know, one of those comments in the bottom. So I guess the most common one would
be local install deps or local install dev deps. So that will install, you know, all
your dependencies into the R-packages, you know, library, which is already set up in
your profile. Okay. So that was, so this is a relatively simple project-based, you
know, workflow. It's not super convenient because it's not fully automated, right? So
you need to actually, you know, add, say, the remotes fields and so on. So there's some
work that you need to do, you know, to make this work. You need to create this R profile
file, you know, manually and so on. So some of the ongoing work is just to make this better,
you know, have better tools to, you know, to declare the dependencies of a project,
say snapshot those dependencies, you know, to know their exact version so that when you
deploy your project, you know, you can recreate those exact versions. So that's, so this thing
doesn't exist yet in PKG and we are working on that. And whether it will be in PKG package
or not, that is not, you know, we don't know that yet, but it is definitely something that
we want to have. It would be nice to have, you know, better failure diagnostics, so we
are working on that too, you know, so that if an installation fails, then it will tell
you that it failed because you don't have some library on the system, you know, present.
And I mentioned the snapshotting already. It's possible to make it even faster and we
will add more remote types. So I will just leave you with this. So this is the, there
are the links in the bottom. The package is not on CRAN yet, but it should be on CRAN,
you know, any time basically. It's in the queue, so it can get there any time. Until
it gets there, you know, an easy way to install it is to use this install github-me service
from github. And you can take a look at it at the repository as well. And that's all
I have.
Thank you very much, Gabor, for that introduction. We may have time for one very quick question.
Down near the front, Davis, just catch the microphone. There you go.
So, honestly, I think the most annoying part of installing R packages is when you have
to build packages that have compiled code like C++ from source. So are you planning
to add more support in your package for, to manage the R, .R, make VARs file and, like,
the system path and so on?
Yes, so we definitely want to help with that. So one thing is that, you know, if you manage
to install from source, then we add the package to the cache so you don't need to do it again.
That's one thing. And the other thing is that we want to, you know, look at the system
requirements of your package to try to figure out why you couldn't install it and then give
you some, you know, helpful message, you know, what software or libraries you need to install
the system, you know, to get the installation done.